feat: added deployment modes section (#4731)
platformsh/platformsh-docs: sites/platform/src/learn/overview/build-deploy.md

### Manual deployment

When enabled, manual deployment lets you control when deployments happen. This means that changes will be staged but not deployed until explicitly triggered by the user. This type of deployment is ideal for teams that want to bundle multiple changes and deploy them together in a controlled manner.

When manual deployment is enabled in an environment, the following actions are queued until deployment is triggered:

| Category             | Staged Activities |
|----------------------|------------------|
| **Code**             | `environment.push`, `environment.merge`, `environment.merge-pr` |
| **Variables**        | `environment.variable.create`, `update`, `delete` |
| **Resources**        | `environment.resources.update` |
| **Domains & Routes** | `environment.domain.*`, `environment.route.*` |
| **Environment Settings** | `environment.update.http_access`, `smtp`, `restrict_robots` |

{{< note theme="info" >}}

Note that development environments **always** use automatic deployment, while manual deployment is only available for staging and production environments.

{{< /note >}}

> ### Change deployment type

Reviewer: We just added a new command `platform environment:deploy:type` to manipulate the type from CLI (lists the type if no args, or accepts manual|automatic)

Author: Hi @vitolkachova i've added this - i think it'd be good to include the output that the user can expect though. Do you have any insight please?

```bash
platform environment:list

```
Then deploy the staged changes to a specific environment:

```bash
platform environment:deploy
```

The output should look similar to the example below:

```bash
Deploying staged changes:
+---------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+---------+
| ID            | Created                   | Description                                               | Result  |
+---------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+---------+
| 5uh3xwmkh5boq | 2024-11-22T14:01:10+00:00 | Patrick pushed to main                                    | failure |
| fno2qiodq7e3c | 2024-11-22T13:06:18+00:00 | Arseni updated resource allocation on main                | success |
| xzvcazrtoafeu | 2024-11-22T13:01:10+00:00 | Pilar added variable HELLO_WORLD to main                  | success |
| fq73u53ruwloq | 2024-11-22T12:06:17+00:00 | Pilar pushed to main                                      | success |
+---------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+---------+
```

<--->
+++
title=Using the Console
+++

> In the Console, a **Deploy** button will appear in the environment whenever changes are staged. You can review a summary of the pending changes before confirming the deployment.

Reviewer: Deploy button is always visible when Manual Deployments are on, and we do not specifically display the pending changes to verify.

<img width="596" height="509" alt="Screenshot 2025-08-05 at 14 35 38" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/70fa36ca-31e6-4ab8-93b8-96a23eae0812" />

After the deploy process is over, any commands in your `post_deploy` hook are run.

> ## Deployment modes

Reviewer: Console already calls them "types", can we stick to that?

{{% vendor/name %}} supports two deployment modes - automatic and manual. These modes help to provide control over when changes are applied to staging and production environments.

### Automatic deployment (default)

> This is the current and default behavior for all environments. With automatic deployment, changes like code pushes and variable updates are deployed immediately. This mode of deployment is best suited for rapid iteration during development.

Reviewer: Will `current` be relevant here after the feature is launched?

| **Resources**        | `environment.resources.update` |
| **Domains & Routes** | `environment.domain.*`, `environment.route.*` |
| **Environment Settings** | `environment.update.http_access`, `smtp`, `restrict_robots` |

{{< note theme="info" >}}

Note that development environments **always** use automatic deployment, while manual deployment is only available for staging and production environments.

{{< /note >}}

### Enable or disable manual deployment

You can adjust deployment behavior in your environment (staging or production only).  To switch to manual mode, navigate to the environment settings in the Console and un-check “Enable automatic deployments”. 

To revert to automatic deployments, re-check the same setting.

{{< note theme="tip" >}}

If manual deployment is disabled, all currently staged changes will be deployed immediately and the environment will resume automatic deployment (default) behavior.

{{< /note >}}

### Trigger deployment manually

Once manual mode is active, eligible changes are staged. You can deploy them in the following ways:

{{< codetabs >}}

+++
title=Using the CLI
+++

List environments with the following command:

```bash

> platform list

Reviewer: This command is listing all available commands, not the envs

After the deploy process is over, any commands in your `post_deploy` hook are run.

## Deployment types

{{% vendor/name %}} supports two deployment types - automatic and manual. These types help to provide control over when changes are applied to staging and production environments.

### Automatic deployment (default)

> This is the default behavior for all environments. With automatic deployment, changes like code pushes and variable updates are deployed immediately. This type of deployment is best suited for rapid iteration during development.

Reviewer 2: Seems wrong especially since manual deployments can't actually be enabled on dev environments but only production and staging. So it's more during the initial setup.

When enabled, manual deployment lets you control when deployments happen. This means that changes will be staged but not deployed until explicitly triggered by the user. This type of deployment is ideal for teams that want to bundle multiple changes and deploy them together in a controlled manner.

When manual deployment is enabled in an environment, the following actions are queued until deployment is triggered:

| Category             | Staged Activities |
|----------------------|------------------|
| **Code**             | `environment.push`, `environment.merge`, `environment.merge-pr` |
| **Variables**        | `environment.variable.create`, `update`, `delete` |
| **Resources**        | `environment.resources.update` |
| **Domains & Routes** | `environment.domain.*`, `environment.route.*` |
| **Subscription**     | `environment.subscription.update `|
| **Environment Settings** | `environment.update.http_access`, `smtp`, `restrict_robots` |

{{< note theme="info" >}}

Note that development environments **always** use automatic deployment, while manual deployment is only available for staging and production environments.

{{< /note >}}

### Change deployment type

> You can adjust deployment behavior in your environment (staging or production only). To switch to manual, navigate to the environment settings in the Console and select the manual deployments option. 

Author: Hi @gmoigneu @vitolkachova we already have the `upsun environment:deploy:type` and `platform environment:deploy:type` commands in the docs. Is there anything outstanding surrounding this issue? We also have a tab that addresses how to do this via the API too.

> You can adjust deployment behavior in your environment (staging or production only). To switch to manual, navigate to the environment settings in the Console and select the manual deployments option. 

Reviewer: Well we have a "Change deployment type" where we mention the setting can be changed in the Console. We show the CLI command in the section below, which it's not exactly accurate

> You can adjust deployment behavior in your environment (staging or production only). To switch to manual, navigate to the environment settings in the Console and select the manual deployments option. 

Author: Thanks @vitolkachova! I was under the impression that the CLI commands were accurate. @davidbonachera could you please let me know if there is something that needs to be changed regarding how users change deployment type via the CLI? It looks like this is the one outstanding thing that needs clarifying before we can merge :)

> You can adjust deployment behavior in your environment (staging or production only). To switch to manual, navigate to the environment settings in the Console and select the manual deployments option. 

Reviewer: The commands themselves are alright, but the placing might be misleading, otherwise this thread would not be started initially.

> You can adjust deployment behavior in your environment (staging or production only). To switch to manual, navigate to the environment settings in the Console and select the manual deployments option. 

Author: That's changed now :)

+---------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+---------+
| 5uh3xwmkh5boq | 2024-11-22T14:01:10+00:00 | Patrick pushed to main                                    | failure |
| fno2qiodq7e3c | 2024-11-22T13:06:18+00:00 | Arseni updated resource allocation on main                | success |
| xzvcazrtoafeu | 2024-11-22T13:01:10+00:00 | Pilar added variable HELLO_WORLD to main                  | success |
| fq73u53ruwloq | 2024-11-22T12:06:17+00:00 | Pilar pushed to main                                      | success |
+---------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+---------+
```
<--->
+++
title=Using the Console
+++

In the Console, a deploy button will be visible in the environment whenever changes are staged. Click this button to deploy your staged changes. 

<--->
+++
title=Using the API
+++

Trigger the deployment of staged changes with the following:

```bash
POST /projects/{projectId}/environments/{environmentId}/deploy
```

{{< /codetabs >}}

{{< note theme="tip" >}}

> As soon as your deployment type is switched from automatic to manual, all currently staged changes are deployed immediately and the environment resumes its default automatic deployment behavior.

Author: ```suggestion
As soon as your deployment type is switched from manual to automatic, all currently staged changes are deployed immediately and the environment resumes its default automatic deployment behavior.
```

> As soon as your deployment type is switched from automatic to manual, all currently staged changes are deployed immediately and the environment resumes its default automatic deployment behavior.

Author: Thank you for spotting @ralt - that's changed now

After the deploy process is over, any commands in your `post_deploy` hook are run.

## Deployment types

{{% vendor/name %}} supports two deployment types - automatic and manual. These types help to provide control over when changes are applied to staging and production environments.

### Automatic deployment (default)

This is the default behavior for all environments. With automatic deployment, changes like code pushes and variable updates are deployed immediately. This type of deployment is best suited for rapid iteration during development.

### Manual deployment

When enabled, manual deployment lets you control when deployments happen. This means that changes will be staged but not deployed until explicitly triggered by the user. This type of deployment is ideal for teams that want to bundle multiple changes and deploy them together in a controlled manner.

When manual deployment is enabled in an environment, the following actions are queued until deployment is triggered:

| Category             | Staged Activities |
|----------------------|------------------|

> | **Code**             | `environment.push`, `environment.merge`, `environment.merge-pr` |

Reviewer 3: We are missing on platform.sh docs one activity category Subscription, environment.subscription.update .

It is only on platform.sh not upsun.

| **Variables**        | `environment.variable.create`, `update`, `delete` |
| **Resources**        | `environment.resources.update` |

> | **Domains & Routes** | `environment.domain.*`, `environment.route.*` |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| **Domains & Routes** | `environment.domain.*`, `environment.route.*` |
| **Subscription** | `environment.subscription.update `|
```

| **Environment Settings** | `environment.update.http_access`, `smtp`, `restrict_robots` |

{{< note theme="info" >}}

Note that development environments **always** use automatic deployment, while manual deployment is only available for staging and production environments.

{{< /note >}}

### Change deployment type

You can adjust deployment behavior in your environment (staging or production only). To switch to manual, navigate to the environment settings in the Console and select the manual deployments option. 

{{< note theme="tip" >}}

> If manual deployment is enabled, all currently staged changes will be deployed immediately and the environment will resume automatic deployment (default) behavior.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If manual deployment is enabled, all currently staged changes will be deployed immediately and the environment will resume automatic deployment (default) behavior.
```
```suggestion
When switching from manual to automatic deployment, all currently staged changes will be deployed immediately, and the environment will resume its default automatic deployment behavior.
```

{{< codetabs >}}

+++
title=Using the CLI
+++

Deploy staged changes to your chosen environment:

```bash
platform environment:deploy
```

The output should look similar to the example below:

```bash
Deploying staged changes:
+---------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+---------+
| ID            | Created                   | Description                                               | Result  |
+---------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+---------+
| 5uh3xwmkh5boq | 2024-11-22T14:01:10+00:00 | Patrick pushed to main                                    | failure |
| fno2qiodq7e3c | 2024-11-22T13:06:18+00:00 | Arseni updated resource allocation on main                | success |
| xzvcazrtoafeu | 2024-11-22T13:01:10+00:00 | Pilar added variable HELLO_WORLD to main                  | success |
| fq73u53ruwloq | 2024-11-22T12:06:17+00:00 | Pilar pushed to main                                      | success |
+---------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+---------+
```

> You can also use the following command to manipulate the type from the CLI:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can also use the following command to view or change the deployment type:
```

```bash
platform environment:deploy:type
```
The output should look similar to the example below:

```bash
Selected project: [my-project (ID)]
Selected environment: main (type: production)
Deployment type: manual
```

> For more information about how this command works, use:
> 
> ```bash
> --help
> ``` 
> 
> Where you will find context similar to the information shown below:
> 
> ```bash
> Description: Show or set the environment deployment type
> 
> Usage:
>  platform environment:deploy:type [--pipe] [-p|--project PROJECT] [-e|--environment ENVIRONMENT] [-W|--no-wait] [--wait] [--] [<type>]
> 
> Arguments:
>   type                           The environment deployment type: automatic or manual.
> 
> Options:
>   ....
> 
> Help:
>  Choose automatic (the default) if you want your changes to be deployed immediately as they are made.
>  Choose manual to have changes staged until you trigger a deployment (including changes to code, variables, domains and settings).
> 
> Examples:
>  Set the deployment type to "manual" (disable automatic deployments):
>    platform environment:deploy:type manual
> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For more information about how this command works, use:

```bash
platform environment:deploy:type --help
``` 

```
